feat: Add Contract Metadata Standard (#330)
near/NEPs: specs/Standards/ContractMetadata.md

# Contract Metadata

## [NEP-330](https://github.com/near/NEPs/discussions/329)

Version `1.0.0`

## Summary

> The contract metadata is a standard interface to allow for auditing and viewing source code for a deployed smart contract. Implementation of this standard is purely optional but is recommended for developers whose contracts are open source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contract metadata is a standard interface that allows auditing and viewing source code for a deployed smart contract. Implementation of this standard is purely optional but is recommended for developers whose contracts are open source.
```

## Motivation

> There is no trivial way of finding the source code or author of a deployed smart contract. Having a standard that outlines how to view the source code of an arbitrary smart contract creates an environment of openness and collaboration.

Reviewer 2: One of the main use cases of having this standard, is if we are able to reproduce the same binary after we have access to the source code. I'm wondering if as part of it we should add a proposal or advise about how we can achieve byte for byte reproducibility. 

Having a standard for reproducibility can be useful for external tools to automatically verify the code.

This is hard in general, mostly because there is more than one stack that can be used to generate the contract binary (i.e today we support rust and assembly script). Relevant discussion on how to make this possible on rust: https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/9506

Reviewer 3: A link to a docker image could be sufficient.

> There is no trivial way of finding the source code or author of a deployed smart contract. By having a standard that outlines how to view the source code of an arbitrary smart contract, an environment of openness and collaboration is created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no trivial way of finding the source code or author of a deployed smart contract. Having a standard that outlines how to view the source code of an arbitrary smart contract creates an environment of openness and collaboration.
```

The initial discussion can be found [here](https://github.com/near/NEPs/discussions/329).

## Interface

Metadata applies at the contract level (`ContractMetadata`):

```ts
type ContractMetadata = {
  version: string|null, // optional, commit hash being used for the currently deployed wasm. If the contract is not open-sourced, this could also be a numbering system for internal organization / tracking such as "1.0.0" and "2.1.0".

>   link: string|null, //optional,  link to open source code such as a Github repository or a CID to somewhere on IPFS.

Reviewer 4: @BenKurrek @austinabell @MaximusHaximus what are your thoughts of adding a system field so we can get some info on what system helped generate the wasm as well.  This way we can try to rebuild the wasm and compare the hashes for auditing purposes.

Reviewer 4: `system: "local"|string,`

Reviewer 5: I mean, you would need architecture and toolchain version at least. Would the purpose of this be human-readable so someone could try to replicate it? You would also need some commit or version since the link doesn't specify repo links to commit that it was built with

Reviewer 4: yeah ideally i want to be able to reference the source code and source dependencies to help with auditing the contract.  Here's what polygon does which is pretty cool: https://polygonscan.com/address/0x217cF04C783818E5b15Ae0723b22Ee2415Ab5fe3#code

Author: I was assuming that the toolchain version would be kept in the Github repo.  I don't really see the need to add a system field but would love other people's opinions

>   link: string|null, //optional,  link to open source code such as a Github repository or a CID to somewhere on IPFS.

Reviewer 2: What about adding some sort of organization contact link as well that points to the website of the application, or the developers; potentially with more contact information!

The difference between it and `link` is that one is to discover the source code, and the other is to discover what is the preferred way to reach developers/community behind this smart contract.

Author: I think this information could be found by utilizing the `link` since you can open issues or PRs on Github and follow or view the developers' public profiles. The case where I think this might be useful, is if the link is a CID to somewhere on IPFS since you don't have the same ability to reach out or view the developers as you do using Github.

thoughts? @austinabell @agileurbanite

Reviewer 2: I would actually go even further and provide three different fields (similar to [crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/rand)): `Homepage`, `Documentation` and `Repository` + `version` (to pin the exact version and allow reproducing the exact same binary).

Some services like [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/near-api-js) only have `Homepage` and `Repository`. (Maybe `documentation` is a bit too much).

}
```

A new function for querying the metadata must be supported on each smart contract implementing the standard:

```ts
function contract_metadata(): ContractMetadata {}
```

It is up to the author of the contract to keep the version and link up to date when new code is deployed. They can choose to update the metadata with a setter, have it static on the contract, or any other way of their choosing.

### An implementing contract MAY include the following fields on-chain

- `version`: a string that references the specific commit hash or version of the code that is currently deployed on-chain. This can be included regardless of whether or not the contract is open-sourced and can also be used for organizational purposes.

> - `link`: a string that references the link to the open source code. This can be anything such as Github or a CID to somewhere on IPFS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `link`: a string that references the link to the open-source code. This can be anything such as Github or a CID to somewhere on IPFS.
```

The initial discussion can be found [here](https://github.com/near/NEPs/discussions/329).

## Interface

Metadata applies at the contract level (`ContractMetadata`):

```ts
type ContractMetadata = {
  version: string|null, // optional, commit hash being used for the currently deployed wasm. If the contract is not open-sourced, this could also be a numbering system for internal organization / tracking such as "1.0.0" and "2.1.0".
  link: string|null, //optional,  link to open source code such as a Github repository or a CID to somewhere on IPFS.
}
```

A new function for querying the metadata must be supported on each smart contract implementing the standard:

```ts
function contract_metadata(): ContractMetadata {}
```

A new function for setting the contract metadata in case of updates to the currently deployed wasm or link to the open source code may optionally be implemented:

```ts
function set_contract_metadata(
  metadata: ContractMetadata,

> ): ContractMetadata {}

Reviewer 5: why do you need this? wouldn't you just statically update what is returned when you upgrade the contract code? Or is this to be able to update the link when you don't want to upgrade the contract?

Author: That's a good point - you could just have everything as static variables in the contract but I kept it open in case people wanted to bump versions without having to redeploy the contract (for organizational purposes).

Reviewer 5: but then if it's optional, maybe it shouldn't be a part of the standard? Kinda like mint for nfts?

Author: That's a good point - I'll change it and leave it up to the author to figure out they want to change the metadata.
